docs/protobuf.md, before:

# Protocol Buffers

Anki uses [different implementations of Protocol Buffers](./architecture.md#protobuf)
and each has its own peculiarities. This document highlights some aspects relevant
to Anki and hopefully helps to avoid some common pitfalls.

For information about Protobuf's types and syntax, please see the official [language guide](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3).

## General Notes

### Names

Generated code follows the naming conventions of the targeted language. So to access
the message field `foo_bar` you need to use `fooBar` in Typescript and the
namespace created by the message `FooBar` is called `foo_bar` in Rust.

### Optional Values

In Python and Typescript, unset optional values will contain the type's default
value rather than `None`, `null` or `undefined`. Here's an example:

```protobuf
message Foo {
  optional string name = 1;
  optional int32 number = 2;
}
```

```python
message = Foo()
assert message.number == 0
assert message name == ""
```

In Python, we can use the message's `HasField()` method to check whether a field is
actually set:

```python
message = Foo(name="")
assert message.HasField("name")
assert not message.HasField("number")
```

In Typescript, this is even less ergonomic and it can be easier to avoid using
the default values in active fields. E.g. the `CsvMetadata` message uses 1-based
indices instead of optional 0-based ones to avoid ambiguity when an index is `0`.

### Oneofs

All fields in a oneof are implicitly optional, so the caveats [above](#optional-values)
apply just as much to a message like this:

```protobuf
message Foo {
    oneof bar {
      string name = 1;
      int32 number = 2;
    }
}
```

In addition to `HasField()`, `WhichOneof()` can be used to get the name of the set
field:

```python
message = Foo(name="")
assert message.WhichOneof("bar") == "name"
```

### Backwards Compatibility

The official [language guide](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3)
makes a lot of notes about backwards compatibility, but as Anki usually doesn't
use Protobuf to communicate between different clients, things like shuffling around
field numbers are usually not a concern.

However, there are some messages, like `Deck`, which get stored in the database.
If these are modified in an incompatible way, this can lead to serious issues if
clients with a different protocol try to read them. Such modifications are only
safe to make as part of a schema upgrade, because schema 11 (the targeted schema
when choosing _Downgrade_), does not make use of Protobuf messages.

### Field Numbers

Field numbers larger than 15 need an additional byte to encode, so `repeated` fields
should preferably be assigned a number between 1 and 15. If a message contains
`reserved` fields, this is usually to accommodate potential future `repeated` fields.

## Implementation-Specific Notes

### Python

Protobuf has an official Python implementation with an extensive [reference](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/python-generated).

- Every message used in aqt or pylib must be added to the respective `.pylintrc`
  to avoid failing type checks. The unqualified protobuf message's name must be
  used, not an alias from `collection.py` for example. This should be taken into
  account when choosing a message name in order to prevent skipping typechecking
  a Python class of the same name.

### Typescript

Anki uses [protobuf-es](https://github.com/bufbuild/protobuf-es), which offers
some documentation.

### Rust

Anki uses the [prost crate](https://docs.rs/prost/latest/prost/).
Its documentation has some useful hints, but for working with the generated code,
there is a better option: From within `anki/rslib` run `cargo doc --open --document-private-items`.
Inside the `pb` module you will find all generated Rust types and their implementations.

- Given an enum field `Foo foo = 1;`, `message.foo` is an `i32`. Use the accessor
  `message.foo()` instead to avoid having to manually convert to a `Foo`.
- Protobuf does not guarantee any oneof field to be set or an enum field to contain
  a valid variant, so the Rust code needs to deal with a lot of `Option`s. As we
  don't expect other parts of Anki to send invalid messages, using an `InvalidInput`
  error or `unwrap_or_default()` is usually fine.

Commit message:

Introduce language_bridge.md
This commit explains how to calls a method implemented in a language
from a different language.

This explains how to declare the RPCs, how to call them and how to
implement them. This is based on examples of code at main at the time
of writting. I used permalink to ensure that the links remains
relevant even if the specific examples change later.

The last section is about the special case of calling TypeScript from
Python, which does not use RPC but is still relevant in a bridge
document.

This commit also add a paragraph explaining what protobuf is in the
protobuf documentation, so that new contributors who don't know what
protobuf is can understand why we use it.

docs/protobuf.md, after:

ProtoBuf is a format used both to save data in storage and transmit
data between services. You can think of it as similar to JSON with
schemas, given that you can use basic types, list and records. Except
that it's usually transmitted and saved in an efficient byteform and
not in a human readable way.

# Protocol Buffers

Anki uses [different implementations of Protocol Buffers](./architecture.md#protobuf)
and each has its own peculiarities. This document highlights some aspects relevant
to Anki and hopefully helps to avoid some common pitfalls.

For information about Protobuf's types and syntax, please see the official [language guide](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3).

## General Notes

### Names

Generated code follows the naming conventions of the targeted language. So to access
the message field `foo_bar` you need to use `fooBar` in Typescript and the
namespace created by the message `FooBar` is called `foo_bar` in Rust.

### Optional Values

In Python and Typescript, unset optional values will contain the type's default
value rather than `None`, `null` or `undefined`. Here's an example:

```protobuf
message Foo {
  optional string name = 1;
  optional int32 number = 2;
}
```

```python
message = Foo()
assert message.number == 0
assert message name == ""
```

In Python, we can use the message's `HasField()` method to check whether a field is
actually set:

```python
message = Foo(name="")
assert message.HasField("name")
assert not message.HasField("number")
```

In Typescript, this is even less ergonomic and it can be easier to avoid using
the default values in active fields. E.g. the `CsvMetadata` message uses 1-based
indices instead of optional 0-based ones to avoid ambiguity when an index is `0`.

### Oneofs

All fields in a oneof are implicitly optional, so the caveats [above](#optional-values)
apply just as much to a message like this:

```protobuf
message Foo {
    oneof bar {
      string name = 1;
      int32 number = 2;
    }
}
```

In addition to `HasField()`, `WhichOneof()` can be used to get the name of the set
field:

```python
message = Foo(name="")
assert message.WhichOneof("bar") == "name"
```

### Backwards Compatibility

The official [language guide](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3)
makes a lot of notes about backwards compatibility, but as Anki usually doesn't
use Protobuf to communicate between different clients, things like shuffling around
field numbers are usually not a concern.

However, there are some messages, like `Deck`, which get stored in the database.
If these are modified in an incompatible way, this can lead to serious issues if
clients with a different protocol try to read them. Such modifications are only
safe to make as part of a schema upgrade, because schema 11 (the targeted schema
when choosing _Downgrade_), does not make use of Protobuf messages.

### Field Numbers

Field numbers larger than 15 need an additional byte to encode, so `repeated` fields
should preferably be assigned a number between 1 and 15. If a message contains
`reserved` fields, this is usually to accommodate potential future `repeated` fields.

## Implementation-Specific Notes

### Python

Protobuf has an official Python implementation with an extensive [reference](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/python-generated).

- Every message used in aqt or pylib must be added to the respective `.pylintrc`
  to avoid failing type checks. The unqualified protobuf message's name must be
  used, not an alias from `collection.py` for example. This should be taken into
  account when choosing a message name in order to prevent skipping typechecking
  a Python class of the same name.

### Typescript

Anki uses [protobuf-es](https://github.com/bufbuild/protobuf-es), which offers
some documentation.

### Rust

Anki uses the [prost crate](https://docs.rs/prost/latest/prost/).
Its documentation has some useful hints, but for working with the generated code,
there is a better option: From within `anki/rslib` run `cargo doc --open --document-private-items`.
Inside the `pb` module you will find all generated Rust types and their implementations.

- Given an enum field `Foo foo = 1;`, `message.foo` is an `i32`. Use the accessor
  `message.foo()` instead to avoid having to manually convert to a `Foo`.
- Protobuf does not guarantee any oneof field to be set or an enum field to contain
  a valid variant, so the Rust code needs to deal with a lot of `Option`s. As we
  don't expect other parts of Anki to send invalid messages, using an `InvalidInput`
  error or `unwrap_or_default()` is usually fine.
